# Early Game


!!! warning "Note"

    These guides assume that you know how to work with EMI and any of the mods mentioned. This guide specifically assumes that you know how to work with EMI, Gregtech, Create and Pipez. Check their respective pages for more information.



### Sticks and Stones


The goal of this section is to be able to produce **Copper**, **Iron**, **Tin** and **Zinc**, as well as other resources using the sieves.  
Here is the entire progression up until then.  
(If you are familiar with Ex Nihilo, you *can* skip this entire section.)


The starting island has a tree and grass. The tree is your source of **Wood** of course.  
If you want to speed up the growth of saplings, you can run around the saplings or spam-crouch to "bonemeal" the saplings.  
The grass will be your source of **Cobblestone**. "shift+right-click" the grass to obtain pebbles. You can also get Granite, Diorite and Andesite by doing this.

!!! info ""
    *Tip: When trying to make cobblestone, try to press "shift+k" or "k" while hovering over some pebbles!*


Using wood and cobblestone, make sure you get these items.  
- Any **Ex Nihilo Hammer**  
- Any **Ex Nihilo Crook**  
- Any **(wooden) Crucible**  
- A **Wooden Bucket**  
- A **Wooden Barrel** *(for later)*  
- A **Composter** *(for later)*  
- A few **Sieves** (25 will do)
- A few **Furnaces** (4 will do)


The Hammer, Crook and Sieves are the most important for the goal, however first there are some other things.  
You want to get an infinite water source at some point and making water takes time so...  
Inserting four saplings in the Crucible will give you exactly one bucket of **Water**.

!!! info ""
    *Tip: You can speed the process up by putting a valid heat source under the crucible (campfires are currently the best).*


Mining leaves of any tree using the Crook will give you **Silkworm**.  
Use a silkworm on leaves to infest the leaves. This infestation will spread to other leaves and does also need a little time.  
Once fully infested, mine the infested leaves using the crook again to get **String**.  
Finally, use string to make as many **String Meshes** as you have sieves.

!!! info ""
    *Tip: There is a veinminer mod in this pack! Be careful with it though... you do not want to accidentally delete your floor.*


Put all string meshes in all your sieves.  
Using the Hammer, mine cobblestone to get **Gravel**. You can also mine gravel with the hammer to get **Sand** and sand to get **Dust**, but those are not required yet.  
Use the sand on the sieves with meshes and you will get:  
- **Crushed Copper Ore** (copper, 65%)  
- **Crushed Iron Ore** (iron, 45%)  
- **Crushed Tin Ore** (tin, 30%)  
- **Crushed Magnetite Ore** (iron, 25%)  
- **Crushed Sphalerite Ore** (zinc, 25%)


And that is what you will need to progress!  
You can also sieve Sand and Dust for other important items.


### Createing the First Automation


Now that you have a source of Copper, Iron, Tin and Zinc, you can start progressing even further. But you probably want some automated cobblestone by now, right? The goal of this section is exactly that, to **automate cobblestone**.


To get cobblestone automated you need to have:  
- A **Stone Barrel**  
- 1b of **Lava**  
- A method of pumping water into the Stone Barrel


To get Lava, you need to get **Bonemeal** and **Clay**. Here is where the Composter and Wooden Barrel come into play.  
I am also assuming you have a **infinite water source** by now.  

To get clay you need to put dust in the wooden barrel and 1b of water. This should make 1 **Clay**.  
If this doesn't work, check if the machine mode is set correctly.  
Bonemeal is obtained by putting compostable items in the composter (stuff like crops and saplings).

With Clay *Balls* and Bonemeal you can make **Porcelain Clay**. You'll need seven porcelain clay.  
With 7 Porcelain Clay you can make an **Unfired Crucible**. Now smelt that, and you have a **Fired Crucible**.

Finally, place the fired crucible above a heat source (campfires are the best) and now you can get lava through inserting cobblestone or any of the stone variants.


The stone barrel just costs some stone and a bucket. Sounds easy does it? No.  
Crafting a bucket is not so simple anymore. This time, it requires 3 Iron Plates and a Gregtech Hammer.
If you do not have a Gregtech Hammer and no method of making plates, you'll need 12 iron. 6 iron for the hammer and 6 iron for the plates.  
Only then do you have a regular bucket.


At this point in the game, you do not have many options to insert water in the stone barrel.  
The methods now are:  
- Create's **Mechanical Pump**  
- An **Aqueous Accumulator** (with Pipez's **Fluid Pipe**)


The Mechanical Pump is the easiest, but takes up more space whereas an Aqueous Accumulator is a lot more compact.  
Both require some progress though.


To get either method to work, you will have to use Create in some way to make things easier.  
And to start with that, you should make a Mechanical Press, as it makes plates way easier to make at the cost of maybe taking some time.  
However, you will also need to make a source of Rotational Power to power the mechanical press.  
For reference, a maximum speed mechanical press will need 2048 SU to work.


Once you have set up the mechanical press, you can make plates with a cheaper ratio. Now you can branch of to just using a mechanical pump or to get an aqueous accumulator.

The mechanical pump just requires copper and some rotational power.


The Aqueous Accumulator requires Glass, Lead and a few other resources that you can already obtain.  
The glass is the easiest. You can make **Glass** through putting glass dust on a campfire, the **Glass dust** is made with Quartz Sand and Flint Dust. Both **Quartz Sand** and **Flint Dust** require a mortar or another method of crushing Sand and Flint into these items.  

Lead is a little silly. To get lead you first need to start by getting Mud.  
You can make **Mud** by putting dirt and 1b of water inside a wooden barrel. After sieving some mud, you should eventually obtain **Mycelium Spores**. These spores can be used in the wooden barrel with 1b of water to create **Witch Water** (do not forget to set the correct machine mode!). The witch water can then be used to obtain one **Soul Sand**. Make a **Soul Campfire** out of the soul sand, you will see why.  
Now craft an **Encased Fan**. This thing does not increase processing speed when fed with a high RPM, so do not bother giving it a high RPM (it only increases range and speed of pushing items). Place the Soul Campfire in front of it, and make sure the fan is **PUSHING**, not **PULLING**. If all is well, you now have a Bulk Haunter.  
The bulk haunter does everything that Witch Water would do in terms of transforming blocks. It can turn Sand into Soul Sand, Dirt into Soul Soil and best of all, Cobblestone into **Blackstone**.


Mining Blackstone with a hammer gives you Crushed Blackstone. You can sieve that for:  
- Crushed Galena Ore (lead, 40%)  
- Crushed Stibnite Ore (antimony, 30%)


As you can see, this gives you the lead that you need for the aqueous accumulator.  
You do also need some fluid pipes however. These will just require more Gregtech Tools for the tiny copper fluid pipes and bronze.  
You can make bronze using Copper Dust and Tin Dust. If you would rather not use dusts to make alloys, you can also make the Create Mixer, though it would also require a Basin and Basic Burner, as well as Rotational Power and usually some fuel for the burner.


You then can make the automatic cobblestone generator! Put your bucket of lava in the stone barrel and then make the automatic pump system.  
For the Mechanical Pump, make sure you give it enough RPM so that it can keep up with the stone barrel's usage.  
For the Aqueous Accumulator, make sure that *two* fluid pipes are pulling from the accumulator into the stone barrel.